# First Day

We're essentially expanding spectral theory to infinite dimensional operators.

The book is *Introductory Functional Analysis* with applications by Kreyszig.

## 1.1 Metric Spaces

A metrix space $X$ is a set $X$ and a mapping $d:X\times X \rightarrow \R $ with

- $d(x,y) \geq 0$
- $d(x,y)=0 \iff x=y$
- $d(x,y) = d(y,x)$
- $d(x,y) \leq d(x,z) + d(z,y)$

A mapping satisfying all of these is a metric. So a metric space is $(X,d)$.

### Examples

1. $X=\R,d(x,y)=|x-y|$
2. $X=\R^n,d(x,y)=||x-y||$
3. $X = l^\infty$ set of all bounded sequences $(x_i)_{i=1}^\infty$
    - with metric $x,y\in l^\infty$, $d(x,y) = \sup_{j\in \N}|x_j-y_j|$
3. $X=C[a,b]$  with metric $\max_{t\in[a,b]}|x(t)-y(t)|$
3. $X$ any set with metric (Good for counter examples)

$$
d(x,y)=\begin{cases}0\text{ if } x=y\\ 1 \text{ otherwise}\end{cases}
$$

6. A metric space that is not a normed space. Take all of the points on a sphere where the smallest arclength between two points is the metric. This is a metric but not a normed space.

All Normed spaces with be vector spaces in this class.

## 1.2 Other examples

$S=$ Space of all sequences (Requiring nothing besides being in $\R$)

$$
d(x,y) = \sum\limits_{k=1}^{n}\left(\frac{1}{2^k}\frac{|x_k-y_k|}{1+|x_k-y_k|}\right)
$$
This is always well defined

The first three properties are a lot simpler to show than the last one (triangle inequality) we will do it here.

$$
f(t)=\frac{t}{1+t}\\
\text{note: } f'(t)>0\\
f(|a+b|) \leq f(|a|+|b|)\\
\frac{|a+b|}{1+|a+b|} \leq \frac{|a|+|b|}{1+|a|+|b|} =  \frac{|a|}{1+|a|+|b|} +\frac{|b|}{1+|a|+|b|} \\
\leq f(|a|)+f(|b|)
$$
Take the sequences $x,y,z$ set $a=x_i-z_i,b=z_i-y_i$ then
$$
\frac{|a+b|}{1+|a+b|}\\
=\frac{|x_i-y_i|}{1+|x_i-y_i|} \leq \frac{|x_i-z_i|}{1+|x_i-z_i|}+ \frac{|z_i-y_i|}{1+|z_i-y_i|}\\
\frac{1}{2^j}\frac{|x_i-y_i|}{1+|x_i-y_i|} \leq \frac{1}{2^j}\frac{|x_i-z_i|}{1+|x_i-z_i|}+ \frac{1}{2^j}\frac{|z_i-y_i|}{1+|z_i-y_i|}
$$
Then sum over everything and since it converges and then we get the triangle inequality.

### lp Spaces

take $p\geq 1$

$l^p=$ set of sequences such that $\sum\limits_{k=1}^{\infty}\left(|x_j|^p\right)<\infty$

The distance (metric) is
$$
d(x,y) = (\sum\limits_{k=1}^{\infty}\left(|x_k-y_k|^p\right))^\frac{1}{p}
$$

The special case is $l^2$ its a hilbert space with an inner product

#### Hoelders inequality

if $p>1$ then taking conjugate exponent q with $\frac{1}{p}+\frac{1}{q}=1$

Holder inequality:
$$
\sum\limits_{k=1}^{\infty}\left(x_jy_j\right)\leq ||x||_p||y||_q
$$
special case is in the case of $p=q=2$ Cauchy shwartz

#### Minkowski inequality (Proof in book)

Just the triangle inequality for $l^p$

Another example Bounded functions. Let $B(A)$ be the space of function $x:A\rightarrow \R$ with $x$ bounded

- In this case you can use the sup metric $d(x,y)=\sup_{t\in A}|x(t)-y(y)|$

First three properties are easy to check. For the triangle inequality just bootstrap off the triangle inequality for scalars. Note that if its true for all t in A then its certainly true for the sup

$$
|x-y|\leq |x-z|+|z-y|\leq \sup |x-z|+\sup |z-y|
$$
Since the sup is the least upper bounded we can just place a sup on the left because it is certainly less than the least of these:

## 1.3 Open sets, closed sets, and neighborhoods

Define the open ball centered at $x_0\in X$ of radius $R$
$$
B(x_0,R)=\{x\in X, d(x_0,x)<R\}
$$
Define the closed ball
$$
\overline{B(x_0,R)}=\{x\in X, d(x_0,x)\leq R\}
$$
Define the sphere as well:
$$
S(x_0,R)=\{x\in X, d(x_0,x)= R\}\\
S=\overline B-B
$$
Note that the sphere may not have anything in it. Take the discrete metric space as an example. Then
$S(x_0,r)$ is empty if $r\neq 1$

Define (open and closed sets) let X be a metric space $M \subset X$ is open if it contains at least one open ball centered about each of its points.

A set is closed if its complement is open. $K^c = X-K$

An $\epsilon$ neighborhood is an open ball centered at x of radius $\epsilon$.

Definition: a neighborhood of x is any subset $M\subset X$ that contains an epsilon neighborhood of x

$x_0$ is an interior point of M if M is a neighborhood of $x_0$.

$\mathring{M}$ is the set of all interior points of M, its also the largest openset contained in  is the set of all interior points of M, its also the largest openset contained in MM

Let tau be the collection of all possible open subsets of X, this is the topology of X.

D finition of a topology:

- $\empty \in \tau, X\in \tau$
- an arbitrary union of elements in tau is in tau
- finite intersection of elements in tau is in tau

topological space $\subset$ metric space $\subset$ normed vector spaces $\subset$ inner product spaces.

Distributions are in topological spaces, Metric spaces can be distance on a sphere.

We can complete these to banach spaces and hilbert spaces.

There are basically three different ways that you can describe open sets:
